<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2>
      CHAPTER 16. I AM A NEW BOY IN MORE SENSES THAN ONE
    </h2>
    <p>
      Next morning, after breakfast, I entered on school life again. I went,
      accompanied by Mr. Wickfield, to the scene of my future studies&mdash;a
      grave building in a courtyard, with a learned air about it that seemed
      very well suited to the stray rooks and jackdaws who came down from the
      Cathedral towers to walk with a clerkly bearing on the grass-plot&mdash;and
      was introduced to my new master, Doctor Strong.
    </p>
    <p>
      Doctor Strong looked almost as rusty, to my thinking, as the tall iron
      rails and gates outside the house; and almost as stiff and heavy as the
      great stone urns that flanked them, and were set up, on the top of the
      red-brick wall, at regular distances all round the court, like sublimated
      skittles, for Time to play at. He was in his library (I mean Doctor Strong
      was), with his clothes not particularly well brushed, and his hair not
      particularly well combed; his knee-smalls unbraced; his long black gaiters
      unbuttoned; and his shoes yawning like two caverns on the hearth-rug.
      Turning upon me a lustreless eye, that reminded me of a long-forgotten
      blind old horse who once used to crop the grass, and tumble over the
      graves, in Blunderstone churchyard, he said he was glad to see me: and
      then he gave me his hand; which I didn't know what to do with, as it did
      nothing for itself.
    </p>
    <p>
      But, sitting at work, not far from Doctor Strong, was a very pretty young
      lady&mdash;whom he called Annie, and who was his daughter, I supposed&mdash;who
      got me out of my difficulty by kneeling down to put Doctor Strong's shoes
      on, and button his gaiters, which she did with great cheerfulness and
      quickness. When she had finished, and we were going out to the schoolroom,
      I was much surprised to hear Mr. Wickfield, in bidding her good morning,
      address her as 'Mrs. Strong'; and I was wondering could she be Doctor
      Strong's son's wife, or could she be Mrs. Doctor Strong, when Doctor
      Strong himself unconsciously enlightened me.
    </p>
    <p>
      'By the by, Wickfield,' he said, stopping in a passage with his hand on my
      shoulder; 'you have not found any suitable provision for my wife's cousin
      yet?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'No,' said Mr. Wickfield. 'No. Not yet.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I could wish it done as soon as it can be done, Wickfield,' said Doctor
      Strong, 'for Jack Maldon is needy, and idle; and of those two bad things,
      worse things sometimes come. What does Doctor Watts say,' he added,
      looking at me, and moving his head to the time of his quotation, '"Satan
      finds some mischief still, for idle hands to do."'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Egad, Doctor,' returned Mr. Wickfield, 'if Doctor Watts knew mankind, he
      might have written, with as much truth, "Satan finds some mischief still,
      for busy hands to do." The busy people achieve their full share of
      mischief in the world, you may rely upon it. What have the people been
      about, who have been the busiest in getting money, and in getting power,
      this century or two? No mischief?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Jack Maldon will never be very busy in getting either, I expect,' said
      Doctor Strong, rubbing his chin thoughtfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Perhaps not,' said Mr. Wickfield; 'and you bring me back to the question,
      with an apology for digressing. No, I have not been able to dispose of Mr.
      Jack Maldon yet. I believe,' he said this with some hesitation, 'I
      penetrate your motive, and it makes the thing more difficult.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'My motive,' returned Doctor Strong, 'is to make some suitable provision
      for a cousin, and an old playfellow, of Annie's.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Yes, I know,' said Mr. Wickfield; 'at home or abroad.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Aye!' replied the Doctor, apparently wondering why he emphasized those
      words so much. 'At home or abroad.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Your own expression, you know,' said Mr. Wickfield. 'Or abroad.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Surely,' the Doctor answered. 'Surely. One or other.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'One or other? Have you no choice?' asked Mr. Wickfield.
    </p>
    <p>
      'No,' returned the Doctor.
    </p>
    <p>
      'No?' with astonishment.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Not the least.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'No motive,' said Mr. Wickfield, 'for meaning abroad, and not at home?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'No,' returned the Doctor.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am bound to believe you, and of course I do believe you,' said Mr.
      Wickfield. 'It might have simplified my office very much, if I had known
      it before. But I confess I entertained another impression.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Doctor Strong regarded him with a puzzled and doubting look, which almost
      immediately subsided into a smile that gave me great encouragement; for it
      was full of amiability and sweetness, and there was a simplicity in it,
      and indeed in his whole manner, when the studious, pondering frost upon it
      was got through, very attractive and hopeful to a young scholar like me.
      Repeating 'no', and 'not the least', and other short assurances to the
      same purport, Doctor Strong jogged on before us, at a queer, uneven pace;
      and we followed: Mr. Wickfield, looking grave, I observed, and shaking his
      head to himself, without knowing that I saw him.
    </p>
    <p>
      The schoolroom was a pretty large hall, on the quietest side of the house,
      confronted by the stately stare of some half-dozen of the great urns, and
      commanding a peep of an old secluded garden belonging to the Doctor, where
      the peaches were ripening on the sunny south wall. There were two great
      aloes, in tubs, on the turf outside the windows; the broad hard leaves of
      which plant (looking as if they were made of painted tin) have ever since,
      by association, been symbolical to me of silence and retirement. About
      five-and-twenty boys were studiously engaged at their books when we went
      in, but they rose to give the Doctor good morning, and remained standing
      when they saw Mr. Wickfield and me.
    </p>
    <p>
      'A new boy, young gentlemen,' said the Doctor; 'Trotwood Copperfield.'
    </p>
    <p>
      One Adams, who was the head-boy, then stepped out of his place and
      welcomed me. He looked like a young clergyman, in his white cravat, but he
      was very affable and good-humoured; and he showed me my place, and
      presented me to the masters, in a gentlemanly way that would have put me
      at my ease, if anything could.
    </p>
    <p>
      It seemed to me so long, however, since I had been among such boys, or
      among any companions of my own age, except Mick Walker and Mealy Potatoes,
      that I felt as strange as ever I have done in my life. I was so conscious
      of having passed through scenes of which they could have no knowledge, and
      of having acquired experiences foreign to my age, appearance, and
      condition as one of them, that I half believed it was an imposture to come
      there as an ordinary little schoolboy. I had become, in the Murdstone and
      Grinby time, however short or long it may have been, so unused to the
      sports and games of boys, that I knew I was awkward and inexperienced in
      the commonest things belonging to them. Whatever I had learnt, had so
      slipped away from me in the sordid cares of my life from day to night,
      that now, when I was examined about what I knew, I knew nothing, and was
      put into the lowest form of the school. But, troubled as I was, by my want
      of boyish skill, and of book-learning too, I was made infinitely more
      uncomfortable by the consideration, that, in what I did know, I was much
      farther removed from my companions than in what I did not. My mind ran
      upon what they would think, if they knew of my familiar acquaintance with
      the King's Bench Prison? Was there anything about me which would reveal my
      proceedings in connexion with the Micawber family&mdash;all those
      pawnings, and sellings, and suppers&mdash;in spite of myself? Suppose some
      of the boys had seen me coming through Canterbury, wayworn and ragged, and
      should find me out? What would they say, who made so light of money, if
      they could know how I had scraped my halfpence together, for the purchase
      of my daily saveloy and beer, or my slices of pudding? How would it affect
      them, who were so innocent of London life, and London streets, to discover
      how knowing I was (and was ashamed to be) in some of the meanest phases of
      both? All this ran in my head so much, on that first day at Doctor
      Strong's, that I felt distrustful of my slightest look and gesture; shrunk
      within myself whensoever I was approached by one of my new schoolfellows;
      and hurried off the minute school was over, afraid of committing myself in
      my response to any friendly notice or advance.
    </p>
    <p>
      But there was such an influence in Mr. Wickfield's old house, that when I
      knocked at it, with my new school-books under my arm, I began to feel my
      uneasiness softening away. As I went up to my airy old room, the grave
      shadow of the staircase seemed to fall upon my doubts and fears, and to
      make the past more indistinct. I sat there, sturdily conning my books,
      until dinner-time (we were out of school for good at three); and went
      down, hopeful of becoming a passable sort of boy yet.
    </p>
    <p>
      Agnes was in the drawing-room, waiting for her father, who was detained by
      someone in his office. She met me with her pleasant smile, and asked me
      how I liked the school. I told her I should like it very much, I hoped;
      but I was a little strange to it at first.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You have never been to school,' I said, 'have you?' 'Oh yes! Every day.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ah, but you mean here, at your own home?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Papa couldn't spare me to go anywhere else,' she answered, smiling and
      shaking her head. 'His housekeeper must be in his house, you know.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'He is very fond of you, I am sure,' I said.
    </p>
    <p>
      She nodded 'Yes,' and went to the door to listen for his coming up, that
      she might meet him on the stairs. But, as he was not there, she came back
      again.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mama has been dead ever since I was born,' she said, in her quiet way. 'I
      only know her picture, downstairs. I saw you looking at it yesterday. Did
      you think whose it was?'
    </p>
    <p>
      I told her yes, because it was so like herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Papa says so, too,' said Agnes, pleased. 'Hark! That's papa now!'
    </p>
    <p>
      Her bright calm face lighted up with pleasure as she went to meet him, and
      as they came in, hand in hand. He greeted me cordially; and told me I
      should certainly be happy under Doctor Strong, who was one of the gentlest
      of men.
    </p>
    <p>
      'There may be some, perhaps&mdash;I don't know that there are&mdash;who
      abuse his kindness,' said Mr. Wickfield. 'Never be one of those, Trotwood,
      in anything. He is the least suspicious of mankind; and whether that's a
      merit, or whether it's a blemish, it deserves consideration in all
      dealings with the Doctor, great or small.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He spoke, I thought, as if he were weary, or dissatisfied with something;
      but I did not pursue the question in my mind, for dinner was just then
      announced, and we went down and took the same seats as before.
    </p>
    <p>
      We had scarcely done so, when Uriah Heep put in his red head and his lank
      hand at the door, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Here's Mr. Maldon begs the favour of a word, sir.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am but this moment quit of Mr. Maldon,' said his master.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Yes, sir,' returned Uriah; 'but Mr. Maldon has come back, and he begs the
      favour of a word.'
    </p>
    <p>
      As he held the door open with his hand, Uriah looked at me, and looked at
      Agnes, and looked at the dishes, and looked at the plates, and looked at
      every object in the room, I thought,&mdash;yet seemed to look at nothing;
      he made such an appearance all the while of keeping his red eyes dutifully
      on his master. 'I beg your pardon. It's only to say, on reflection,'
      observed a voice behind Uriah, as Uriah's head was pushed away, and the
      speaker's substituted&mdash;'pray excuse me for this intrusion&mdash;that
      as it seems I have no choice in the matter, the sooner I go abroad the
      better. My cousin Annie did say, when we talked of it, that she liked to
      have her friends within reach rather than to have them banished, and the
      old Doctor&mdash;'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Doctor Strong, was that?' Mr. Wickfield interposed, gravely.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Doctor Strong, of course,' returned the other; 'I call him the old
      Doctor; it's all the same, you know.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I don't know,' returned Mr. Wickfield.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, Doctor Strong,' said the other&mdash;'Doctor Strong was of the same
      mind, I believed. But as it appears from the course you take with me he
      has changed his mind, why there's no more to be said, except that the
      sooner I am off, the better. Therefore, I thought I'd come back and say,
      that the sooner I am off the better. When a plunge is to be made into the
      water, it's of no use lingering on the bank.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'There shall be as little lingering as possible, in your case, Mr. Maldon,
      you may depend upon it,' said Mr. Wickfield.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Thank'ee,' said the other. 'Much obliged. I don't want to look a
      gift-horse in the mouth, which is not a gracious thing to do; otherwise, I
      dare say, my cousin Annie could easily arrange it in her own way. I
      suppose Annie would only have to say to the old Doctor&mdash;'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Meaning that Mrs. Strong would only have to say to her husband&mdash;do I
      follow you?' said Mr. Wickfield.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Quite so,' returned the other, '&mdash;would only have to say, that she
      wanted such and such a thing to be so and so; and it would be so and so,
      as a matter of course.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'And why as a matter of course, Mr. Maldon?' asked Mr. Wickfield, sedately
      eating his dinner.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Why, because Annie's a charming young girl, and the old Doctor&mdash;Doctor
      Strong, I mean&mdash;is not quite a charming young boy,' said Mr. Jack
      Maldon, laughing. 'No offence to anybody, Mr. Wickfield. I only mean that
      I suppose some compensation is fair and reasonable in that sort of
      marriage.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Compensation to the lady, sir?' asked Mr. Wickfield gravely.
    </p>
    <p>
      'To the lady, sir,' Mr. Jack Maldon answered, laughing. But appearing to
      remark that Mr. Wickfield went on with his dinner in the same sedate,
      immovable manner, and that there was no hope of making him relax a muscle
      of his face, he added: 'However, I have said what I came to say, and, with
      another apology for this intrusion, I may take myself off. Of course I
      shall observe your directions, in considering the matter as one to be
      arranged between you and me solely, and not to be referred to, up at the
      Doctor's.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Have you dined?' asked Mr. Wickfield, with a motion of his hand towards
      the table.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Thank'ee. I am going to dine,' said Mr. Maldon, 'with my cousin Annie.
      Good-bye!'
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Wickfield, without rising, looked after him thoughtfully as he went
      out. He was rather a shallow sort of young gentleman, I thought, with a
      handsome face, a rapid utterance, and a confident, bold air. And this was
      the first I ever saw of Mr. Jack Maldon; whom I had not expected to see so
      soon, when I heard the Doctor speak of him that morning.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we had dined, we went upstairs again, where everything went on
      exactly as on the previous day. Agnes set the glasses and decanters in the
      same corner, and Mr. Wickfield sat down to drink, and drank a good deal.
      Agnes played the piano to him, sat by him, and worked and talked, and
      played some games at dominoes with me. In good time she made tea; and
      afterwards, when I brought down my books, looked into them, and showed me
      what she knew of them (which was no slight matter, though she said it
      was), and what was the best way to learn and understand them. I see her,
      with her modest, orderly, placid manner, and I hear her beautiful calm
      voice, as I write these words. The influence for all good, which she came
      to exercise over me at a later time, begins already to descend upon my
      breast. I love little Em'ly, and I don't love Agnes&mdash;no, not at all
      in that way&mdash;but I feel that there are goodness, peace, and truth,
      wherever Agnes is; and that the soft light of the coloured window in the
      church, seen long ago, falls on her always, and on me when I am near her,
      and on everything around.
    </p>
    <p>
      The time having come for her withdrawal for the night, and she having left
      us, I gave Mr. Wickfield my hand, preparatory to going away myself. But he
      checked me and said: 'Should you like to stay with us, Trotwood, or to go
      elsewhere?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'To stay,' I answered, quickly.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are sure?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'If you please. If I may!'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Why, it's but a dull life that we lead here, boy, I am afraid,' he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Not more dull for me than Agnes, sir. Not dull at all!'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Than Agnes,' he repeated, walking slowly to the great chimney-piece, and
      leaning against it. 'Than Agnes!'
    </p>
    <p>
      He had drank wine that evening (or I fancied it), until his eyes were
      bloodshot. Not that I could see them now, for they were cast down, and
      shaded by his hand; but I had noticed them a little while before.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Now I wonder,' he muttered, 'whether my Agnes tires of me. When should I
      ever tire of her! But that's different, that's quite different.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He was musing, not speaking to me; so I remained quiet.
    </p>
    <p>
      'A dull old house,' he said, 'and a monotonous life; but I must have her
      near me. I must keep her near me. If the thought that I may die and leave
      my darling, or that my darling may die and leave me, comes like a spectre,
      to distress my happiest hours, and is only to be drowned in&mdash;'
    </p>
    <p>
      He did not supply the word; but pacing slowly to the place where he had
      sat, and mechanically going through the action of pouring wine from the
      empty decanter, set it down and paced back again.
    </p>
    <p>
      'If it is miserable to bear, when she is here,' he said, 'what would it
      be, and she away? No, no, no. I cannot try that.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He leaned against the chimney-piece, brooding so long that I could not
      decide whether to run the risk of disturbing him by going, or to remain
      quietly where I was, until he should come out of his reverie. At length he
      aroused himself, and looked about the room until his eyes encountered
      mine.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Stay with us, Trotwood, eh?' he said in his usual manner, and as if he
      were answering something I had just said. 'I am glad of it. You are
      company to us both. It is wholesome to have you here. Wholesome for me,
      wholesome for Agnes, wholesome perhaps for all of us.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am sure it is for me, sir,' I said. 'I am so glad to be here.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'That's a fine fellow!' said Mr. Wickfield. 'As long as you are glad to be
      here, you shall stay here.' He shook hands with me upon it, and clapped me
      on the back; and told me that when I had anything to do at night after
      Agnes had left us, or when I wished to read for my own pleasure, I was
      free to come down to his room, if he were there and if I desired it for
      company's sake, and to sit with him. I thanked him for his consideration;
      and, as he went down soon afterwards, and I was not tired, went down too,
      with a book in my hand, to avail myself, for half-an-hour, of his
      permission.
    </p>
    <p>
      But, seeing a light in the little round office, and immediately feeling
      myself attracted towards Uriah Heep, who had a sort of fascination for me,
      I went in there instead. I found Uriah reading a great fat book, with such
      demonstrative attention, that his lank forefinger followed up every line
      as he read, and made clammy tracks along the page (or so I fully believed)
      like a snail.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are working late tonight, Uriah,' says I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Yes, Master Copperfield,' says Uriah.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I was getting on the stool opposite, to talk to him more conveniently,
      I observed that he had not such a thing as a smile about him, and that he
      could only widen his mouth and make two hard creases down his cheeks, one
      on each side, to stand for one.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am not doing office-work, Master Copperfield,' said Uriah.
    </p>
    <p>
      'What work, then?' I asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am improving my legal knowledge, Master Copperfield,' said Uriah. 'I am
      going through Tidd's Practice. Oh, what a writer Mr. Tidd is, Master
      Copperfield!'
    </p>
    <p>
      My stool was such a tower of observation, that as I watched him reading on
      again, after this rapturous exclamation, and following up the lines with
      his forefinger, I observed that his nostrils, which were thin and pointed,
      with sharp dints in them, had a singular and most uncomfortable way of
      expanding and contracting themselves&mdash;that they seemed to twinkle
      instead of his eyes, which hardly ever twinkled at all.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I suppose you are quite a great lawyer?' I said, after looking at him for
      some time.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Me, Master Copperfield?' said Uriah. 'Oh, no! I'm a very umble person.'
    </p>
    <p>
      It was no fancy of mine about his hands, I observed; for he frequently
      ground the palms against each other as if to squeeze them dry and warm,
      besides often wiping them, in a stealthy way, on his pocket-handkerchief.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am well aware that I am the umblest person going,' said Uriah Heep,
      modestly; 'let the other be where he may. My mother is likewise a very
      umble person. We live in a numble abode, Master Copperfield, but have much
      to be thankful for. My father's former calling was umble. He was a
      sexton.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'What is he now?' I asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      'He is a partaker of glory at present, Master Copperfield,' said Uriah
      Heep. 'But we have much to be thankful for. How much have I to be thankful
      for in living with Mr. Wickfield!'
    </p>
    <p>
      I asked Uriah if he had been with Mr. Wickfield long?
    </p>
    <p>
      'I have been with him, going on four year, Master Copperfield,' said
      Uriah; shutting up his book, after carefully marking the place where he
      had left off. 'Since a year after my father's death. How much have I to be
      thankful for, in that! How much have I to be thankful for, in Mr.
      Wickfield's kind intention to give me my articles, which would otherwise
      not lay within the umble means of mother and self!'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Then, when your articled time is over, you'll be a regular lawyer, I
      suppose?' said I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'With the blessing of Providence, Master Copperfield,' returned Uriah.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Perhaps you'll be a partner in Mr. Wickfield's business, one of these
      days,' I said, to make myself agreeable; 'and it will be Wickfield and
      Heep, or Heep late Wickfield.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh no, Master Copperfield,' returned Uriah, shaking his head, 'I am much
      too umble for that!'
    </p>
    <p>
      He certainly did look uncommonly like the carved face on the beam outside
      my window, as he sat, in his humility, eyeing me sideways, with his mouth
      widened, and the creases in his cheeks.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mr. Wickfield is a most excellent man, Master Copperfield,' said Uriah.
      'If you have known him long, you know it, I am sure, much better than I
      can inform you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I replied that I was certain he was; but that I had not known him long
      myself, though he was a friend of my aunt's.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh, indeed, Master Copperfield,' said Uriah. 'Your aunt is a sweet lady,
      Master Copperfield!'
    </p>
    <p>
      He had a way of writhing when he wanted to express enthusiasm, which was
      very ugly; and which diverted my attention from the compliment he had paid
      my relation, to the snaky twistings of his throat and body.
    </p>
    <p>
      'A sweet lady, Master Copperfield!' said Uriah Heep. 'She has a great
      admiration for Miss Agnes, Master Copperfield, I believe?'
    </p>
    <p>
      I said, 'Yes,' boldly; not that I knew anything about it, Heaven forgive
      me!
    </p>
    <p>
      'I hope you have, too, Master Copperfield,' said Uriah. 'But I am sure you
      must have.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Everybody must have,' I returned.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh, thank you, Master Copperfield,' said Uriah Heep, 'for that remark! It
      is so true! Umble as I am, I know it is so true! Oh, thank you, Master
      Copperfield!' He writhed himself quite off his stool in the excitement of
      his feelings, and, being off, began to make arrangements for going home.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mother will be expecting me,' he said, referring to a pale,
      inexpressive-faced watch in his pocket, 'and getting uneasy; for though we
      are very umble, Master Copperfield, we are much attached to one another.
      If you would come and see us, any afternoon, and take a cup of tea at our
      lowly dwelling, mother would be as proud of your company as I should be.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I said I should be glad to come.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Thank you, Master Copperfield,' returned Uriah, putting his book away
      upon the shelf&mdash;'I suppose you stop here, some time, Master
      Copperfield?'
    </p>
    <p>
      I said I was going to be brought up there, I believed, as long as I
      remained at school.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh, indeed!' exclaimed Uriah. 'I should think YOU would come into the
      business at last, Master Copperfield!'
    </p>
    <p>
      I protested that I had no views of that sort, and that no such scheme was
      entertained in my behalf by anybody; but Uriah insisted on blandly
      replying to all my assurances, 'Oh, yes, Master Copperfield, I should
      think you would, indeed!' and, 'Oh, indeed, Master Copperfield, I should
      think you would, certainly!' over and over again. Being, at last, ready to
      leave the office for the night, he asked me if it would suit my
      convenience to have the light put out; and on my answering 'Yes,'
      instantly extinguished it. After shaking hands with me&mdash;his hand felt
      like a fish, in the dark&mdash;he opened the door into the street a very
      little, and crept out, and shut it, leaving me to grope my way back into
      the house: which cost me some trouble and a fall over his stool. This was
      the proximate cause, I suppose, of my dreaming about him, for what
      appeared to me to be half the night; and dreaming, among other things,
      that he had launched Mr. Peggotty's house on a piratical expedition, with
      a black flag at the masthead, bearing the inscription 'Tidd's Practice',
      under which diabolical ensign he was carrying me and little Em'ly to the
      Spanish Main, to be drowned.
    </p>
    <p>
      I got a little the better of my uneasiness when I went to school next day,
      and a good deal the better next day, and so shook it off by degrees, that
      in less than a fortnight I was quite at home, and happy, among my new
      companions. I was awkward enough in their games, and backward enough in
      their studies; but custom would improve me in the first respect, I hoped,
      and hard work in the second. Accordingly, I went to work very hard, both
      in play and in earnest, and gained great commendation. And, in a very
      little while, the Murdstone and Grinby life became so strange to me that I
      hardly believed in it, while my present life grew so familiar, that I
      seemed to have been leading it a long time.
    </p>
    <p>
      Doctor Strong's was an excellent school; as different from Mr. Creakle's
      as good is from evil. It was very gravely and decorously ordered, and on a
      sound system; with an appeal, in everything, to the honour and good faith
      of the boys, and an avowed intention to rely on their possession of those
      qualities unless they proved themselves unworthy of it, which worked
      wonders. We all felt that we had a part in the management of the place,
      and in sustaining its character and dignity. Hence, we soon became warmly
      attached to it&mdash;I am sure I did for one, and I never knew, in all my
      time, of any other boy being otherwise&mdash;and learnt with a good will,
      desiring to do it credit. We had noble games out of hours, and plenty of
      liberty; but even then, as I remember, we were well spoken of in the town,
      and rarely did any disgrace, by our appearance or manner, to the
      reputation of Doctor Strong and Doctor Strong's boys.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some of the higher scholars boarded in the Doctor's house, and through
      them I learned, at second hand, some particulars of the Doctor's history&mdash;as,
      how he had not yet been married twelve months to the beautiful young lady
      I had seen in the study, whom he had married for love; for she had not a
      sixpence, and had a world of poor relations (so our fellows said) ready to
      swarm the Doctor out of house and home. Also, how the Doctor's cogitating
      manner was attributable to his being always engaged in looking out for
      Greek roots; which, in my innocence and ignorance, I supposed to be a
      botanical furor on the Doctor's part, especially as he always looked at
      the ground when he walked about, until I understood that they were roots
      of words, with a view to a new Dictionary which he had in contemplation.
      Adams, our head-boy, who had a turn for mathematics, had made a
      calculation, I was informed, of the time this Dictionary would take in
      completing, on the Doctor's plan, and at the Doctor's rate of going. He
      considered that it might be done in one thousand six hundred and
      forty-nine years, counting from the Doctor's last, or sixty-second,
      birthday.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the Doctor himself was the idol of the whole school: and it must have
      been a badly composed school if he had been anything else, for he was the
      kindest of men; with a simple faith in him that might have touched the
      stone hearts of the very urns upon the wall. As he walked up and down that
      part of the courtyard which was at the side of the house, with the stray
      rooks and jackdaws looking after him with their heads cocked slyly, as if
      they knew how much more knowing they were in worldly affairs than he, if
      any sort of vagabond could only get near enough to his creaking shoes to
      attract his attention to one sentence of a tale of distress, that vagabond
      was made for the next two days. It was so notorious in the house, that the
      masters and head-boys took pains to cut these marauders off at angles, and
      to get out of windows, and turn them out of the courtyard, before they
      could make the Doctor aware of their presence; which was sometimes happily
      effected within a few yards of him, without his knowing anything of the
      matter, as he jogged to and fro. Outside his own domain, and unprotected,
      he was a very sheep for the shearers. He would have taken his gaiters off
      his legs, to give away. In fact, there was a story current among us (I
      have no idea, and never had, on what authority, but I have believed it for
      so many years that I feel quite certain it is true), that on a frosty day,
      one winter-time, he actually did bestow his gaiters on a beggar-woman, who
      occasioned some scandal in the neighbourhood by exhibiting a fine infant
      from door to door, wrapped in those garments, which were universally
      recognized, being as well known in the vicinity as the Cathedral. The
      legend added that the only person who did not identify them was the Doctor
      himself, who, when they were shortly afterwards displayed at the door of a
      little second-hand shop of no very good repute, where such things were
      taken in exchange for gin, was more than once observed to handle them
      approvingly, as if admiring some curious novelty in the pattern, and
      considering them an improvement on his own.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was very pleasant to see the Doctor with his pretty young wife. He had
      a fatherly, benignant way of showing his fondness for her, which seemed in
      itself to express a good man. I often saw them walking in the garden where
      the peaches were, and I sometimes had a nearer observation of them in the
      study or the parlour. She appeared to me to take great care of the Doctor,
      and to like him very much, though I never thought her vitally interested
      in the Dictionary: some cumbrous fragments of which work the Doctor always
      carried in his pockets, and in the lining of his hat, and generally seemed
      to be expounding to her as they walked about.
    </p>
    <p>
      I saw a good deal of Mrs. Strong, both because she had taken a liking for
      me on the morning of my introduction to the Doctor, and was always
      afterwards kind to me, and interested in me; and because she was very fond
      of Agnes, and was often backwards and forwards at our house. There was a
      curious constraint between her and Mr. Wickfield, I thought (of whom she
      seemed to be afraid), that never wore off. When she came there of an
      evening, she always shrunk from accepting his escort home, and ran away
      with me instead. And sometimes, as we were running gaily across the
      Cathedral yard together, expecting to meet nobody, we would meet Mr. Jack
      Maldon, who was always surprised to see us.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Strong's mama was a lady I took great delight in. Her name was Mrs.
      Markleham; but our boys used to call her the Old Soldier, on account of
      her generalship, and the skill with which she marshalled great forces of
      relations against the Doctor. She was a little, sharp-eyed woman, who used
      to wear, when she was dressed, one unchangeable cap, ornamented with some
      artificial flowers, and two artificial butterflies supposed to be hovering
      above the flowers. There was a superstition among us that this cap had
      come from France, and could only originate in the workmanship of that
      ingenious nation: but all I certainly know about it, is, that it always
      made its appearance of an evening, wheresoever Mrs. Markleham made HER
      appearance; that it was carried about to friendly meetings in a Hindoo
      basket; that the butterflies had the gift of trembling constantly; and
      that they improved the shining hours at Doctor Strong's expense, like busy
      bees.
    </p>
    <p>
      I observed the Old Soldier&mdash;not to adopt the name disrespectfully&mdash;to
      pretty good advantage, on a night which is made memorable to me by
      something else I shall relate. It was the night of a little party at the
      Doctor's, which was given on the occasion of Mr. Jack Maldon's departure
      for India, whither he was going as a cadet, or something of that kind: Mr.
      Wickfield having at length arranged the business. It happened to be the
      Doctor's birthday, too. We had had a holiday, had made presents to him in
      the morning, had made a speech to him through the head-boy, and had
      cheered him until we were hoarse, and until he had shed tears. And now, in
      the evening, Mr. Wickfield, Agnes, and I, went to have tea with him in his
      private capacity.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Jack Maldon was there, before us. Mrs. Strong, dressed in white, with
      cherry-coloured ribbons, was playing the piano, when we went in; and he
      was leaning over her to turn the leaves. The clear red and white of her
      complexion was not so blooming and flower-like as usual, I thought, when
      she turned round; but she looked very pretty, Wonderfully pretty.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I have forgotten, Doctor,' said Mrs. Strong's mama, when we were seated,
      'to pay you the compliments of the day&mdash;though they are, as you may
      suppose, very far from being mere compliments in my case. Allow me to wish
      you many happy returns.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I thank you, ma'am,' replied the Doctor.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Many, many, many, happy returns,' said the Old Soldier. 'Not only for
      your own sake, but for Annie's, and John Maldon's, and many other
      people's. It seems but yesterday to me, John, when you were a little
      creature, a head shorter than Master Copperfield, making baby love to
      Annie behind the gooseberry bushes in the back-garden.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'My dear mama,' said Mrs. Strong, 'never mind that now.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Annie, don't be absurd,' returned her mother. 'If you are to blush to
      hear of such things now you are an old married woman, when are you not to
      blush to hear of them?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Old?' exclaimed Mr. Jack Maldon. 'Annie? Come!'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Yes, John,' returned the Soldier. 'Virtually, an old married woman.
      Although not old by years&mdash;for when did you ever hear me say, or who
      has ever heard me say, that a girl of twenty was old by years!&mdash;your
      cousin is the wife of the Doctor, and, as such, what I have described her.
      It is well for you, John, that your cousin is the wife of the Doctor. You
      have found in him an influential and kind friend, who will be kinder yet,
      I venture to predict, if you deserve it. I have no false pride. I never
      hesitate to admit, frankly, that there are some members of our family who
      want a friend. You were one yourself, before your cousin's influence
      raised up one for you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The Doctor, in the goodness of his heart, waved his hand as if to make
      light of it, and save Mr. Jack Maldon from any further reminder. But Mrs.
      Markleham changed her chair for one next the Doctor's, and putting her fan
      on his coat-sleeve, said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'No, really, my dear Doctor, you must excuse me if I appear to dwell on
      this rather, because I feel so very strongly. I call it quite my
      monomania, it is such a subject of mine. You are a blessing to us. You
      really are a Boon, you know.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Nonsense, nonsense,' said the Doctor.
    </p>
    <p>
      'No, no, I beg your pardon,' retorted the Old Soldier. 'With nobody
      present, but our dear and confidential friend Mr. Wickfield, I cannot
      consent to be put down. I shall begin to assert the privileges of a
      mother-in-law, if you go on like that, and scold you. I am perfectly
      honest and outspoken. What I am saying, is what I said when you first
      overpowered me with surprise&mdash;you remember how surprised I was?&mdash;by
      proposing for Annie. Not that there was anything so very much out of the
      way, in the mere fact of the proposal&mdash;it would be ridiculous to say
      that!&mdash;but because, you having known her poor father, and having
      known her from a baby six months old, I hadn't thought of you in such a
      light at all, or indeed as a marrying man in any way,&mdash;simply that,
      you know.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Aye, aye,' returned the Doctor, good-humouredly. 'Never mind.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'But I DO mind,' said the Old Soldier, laying her fan upon his lips. 'I
      mind very much. I recall these things that I may be contradicted if I am
      wrong. Well! Then I spoke to Annie, and I told her what had happened. I
      said, "My dear, here's Doctor Strong has positively been and made you the
      subject of a handsome declaration and an offer." Did I press it in the
      least? No. I said, "Now, Annie, tell me the truth this moment; is your
      heart free?" "Mama," she said crying, "I am extremely young"&mdash;which
      was perfectly true&mdash;"and I hardly know if I have a heart at all."
      "Then, my dear," I said, "you may rely upon it, it's free. At all events,
      my love," said I, "Doctor Strong is in an agitated state of mind, and must
      be answered. He cannot be kept in his present state of suspense." "Mama,"
      said Annie, still crying, "would he be unhappy without me? If he would, I
      honour and respect him so much, that I think I will have him." So it was
      settled. And then, and not till then, I said to Annie, "Annie, Doctor
      Strong will not only be your husband, but he will represent your late
      father: he will represent the head of our family, he will represent the
      wisdom and station, and I may say the means, of our family; and will be,
      in short, a Boon to it." I used the word at the time, and I have used it
      again, today. If I have any merit it is consistency.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The daughter had sat quite silent and still during this speech, with her
      eyes fixed on the ground; her cousin standing near her, and looking on the
      ground too. She now said very softly, in a trembling voice:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mama, I hope you have finished?' 'No, my dear Annie,' returned the Old
      Soldier, 'I have not quite finished. Since you ask me, my love, I reply
      that I have not. I complain that you really are a little unnatural towards
      your own family; and, as it is of no use complaining to you. I mean to
      complain to your husband. Now, my dear Doctor, do look at that silly wife
      of yours.'
    </p>
    <p>
      As the Doctor turned his kind face, with its smile of simplicity and
      gentleness, towards her, she drooped her head more. I noticed that Mr.
      Wickfield looked at her steadily.
    </p>
    <p>
      'When I happened to say to that naughty thing, the other day,' pursued her
      mother, shaking her head and her fan at her, playfully, 'that there was a
      family circumstance she might mention to you&mdash;indeed, I think, was
      bound to mention&mdash;she said, that to mention it was to ask a favour;
      and that, as you were too generous, and as for her to ask was always to
      have, she wouldn't.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Annie, my dear,' said the Doctor. 'That was wrong. It robbed me of a
      pleasure.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Almost the very words I said to her!' exclaimed her mother. 'Now really,
      another time, when I know what she would tell you but for this reason, and
      won't, I have a great mind, my dear Doctor, to tell you myself.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I shall be glad if you will,' returned the Doctor.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Shall I?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Certainly.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, then, I will!' said the Old Soldier. 'That's a bargain.' And
      having, I suppose, carried her point, she tapped the Doctor's hand several
      times with her fan (which she kissed first), and returned triumphantly to
      her former station.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some more company coming in, among whom were the two masters and Adams,
      the talk became general; and it naturally turned on Mr. Jack Maldon, and
      his voyage, and the country he was going to, and his various plans and
      prospects. He was to leave that night, after supper, in a post-chaise, for
      Gravesend; where the ship, in which he was to make the voyage, lay; and
      was to be gone&mdash;unless he came home on leave, or for his health&mdash;I
      don't know how many years. I recollect it was settled by general consent
      that India was quite a misrepresented country, and had nothing
      objectionable in it, but a tiger or two, and a little heat in the warm
      part of the day. For my own part, I looked on Mr. Jack Maldon as a modern
      Sindbad, and pictured him the bosom friend of all the Rajahs in the East,
      sitting under canopies, smoking curly golden pipes&mdash;a mile long, if
      they could be straightened out.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Strong was a very pretty singer: as I knew, who often heard her
      singing by herself. But, whether she was afraid of singing before people,
      or was out of voice that evening, it was certain that she couldn't sing at
      all. She tried a duet, once, with her cousin Maldon, but could not so much
      as begin; and afterwards, when she tried to sing by herself, although she
      began sweetly, her voice died away on a sudden, and left her quite
      distressed, with her head hanging down over the keys. The good Doctor said
      she was nervous, and, to relieve her, proposed a round game at cards; of
      which he knew as much as of the art of playing the trombone. But I
      remarked that the Old Soldier took him into custody directly, for her
      partner; and instructed him, as the first preliminary of initiation, to
      give her all the silver he had in his pocket.
    </p>
    <p>
      We had a merry game, not made the less merry by the Doctor's mistakes, of
      which he committed an innumerable quantity, in spite of the watchfulness
      of the butterflies, and to their great aggravation. Mrs. Strong had
      declined to play, on the ground of not feeling very well; and her cousin
      Maldon had excused himself because he had some packing to do. When he had
      done it, however, he returned, and they sat together, talking, on the
      sofa. From time to time she came and looked over the Doctor's hand, and
      told him what to play. She was very pale, as she bent over him, and I
      thought her finger trembled as she pointed out the cards; but the Doctor
      was quite happy in her attention, and took no notice of this, if it were
      so.
    </p>
    <p>
      At supper, we were hardly so gay. Everyone appeared to feel that a parting
      of that sort was an awkward thing, and that the nearer it approached, the
      more awkward it was. Mr. Jack Maldon tried to be very talkative, but was
      not at his ease, and made matters worse. And they were not improved, as it
      appeared to me, by the Old Soldier: who continually recalled passages of
      Mr. Jack Maldon's youth.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Doctor, however, who felt, I am sure, that he was making everybody
      happy, was well pleased, and had no suspicion but that we were all at the
      utmost height of enjoyment.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Annie, my dear,' said he, looking at his watch, and filling his glass,
      'it is past your cousin Jack's time, and we must not detain him, since
      time and tide&mdash;both concerned in this case&mdash;wait for no man. Mr.
      Jack Maldon, you have a long voyage, and a strange country, before you;
      but many men have had both, and many men will have both, to the end of
      time. The winds you are going to tempt, have wafted thousands upon
      thousands to fortune, and brought thousands upon thousands happily back.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'It's an affecting thing,' said Mrs. Markleham&mdash;'however it's viewed,
      it's affecting, to see a fine young man one has known from an infant,
      going away to the other end of the world, leaving all he knows behind, and
      not knowing what's before him. A young man really well deserves constant
      support and patronage,' looking at the Doctor, 'who makes such
      sacrifices.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Time will go fast with you, Mr. Jack Maldon,' pursued the Doctor, 'and
      fast with all of us. Some of us can hardly expect, perhaps, in the natural
      course of things, to greet you on your return. The next best thing is to
      hope to do it, and that's my case. I shall not weary you with good advice.
      You have long had a good model before you, in your cousin Annie. Imitate
      her virtues as nearly as you can.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Markleham fanned herself, and shook her head.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Farewell, Mr. Jack,' said the Doctor, standing up; on which we all stood
      up. 'A prosperous voyage out, a thriving career abroad, and a happy return
      home!'
    </p>
    <p>
      We all drank the toast, and all shook hands with Mr. Jack Maldon; after
      which he hastily took leave of the ladies who were there, and hurried to
      the door, where he was received, as he got into the chaise, with a
      tremendous broadside of cheers discharged by our boys, who had assembled
      on the lawn for the purpose. Running in among them to swell the ranks, I
      was very near the chaise when it rolled away; and I had a lively
      impression made upon me, in the midst of the noise and dust, of having
      seen Mr. Jack Maldon rattle past with an agitated face, and something
      cherry-coloured in his hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      After another broadside for the Doctor, and another for the Doctor's wife,
      the boys dispersed, and I went back into the house, where I found the
      guests all standing in a group about the Doctor, discussing how Mr. Jack
      Maldon had gone away, and how he had borne it, and how he had felt it, and
      all the rest of it. In the midst of these remarks, Mrs. Markleham cried:
      'Where's Annie?'
    </p>
    <p>
      No Annie was there; and when they called to her, no Annie replied. But all
      pressing out of the room, in a crowd, to see what was the matter, we found
      her lying on the hall floor. There was great alarm at first, until it was
      found that she was in a swoon, and that the swoon was yielding to the
      usual means of recovery; when the Doctor, who had lifted her head upon his
      knee, put her curls aside with his hand, and said, looking around:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Poor Annie! She's so faithful and tender-hearted! It's the parting from
      her old playfellow and friend&mdash;her favourite cousin&mdash;that has
      done this. Ah! It's a pity! I am very sorry!'
    </p>
    <p>
      When she opened her eyes, and saw where she was, and that we were all
      standing about her, she arose with assistance: turning her head, as she
      did so, to lay it on the Doctor's shoulder&mdash;or to hide it, I don't
      know which. We went into the drawing-room, to leave her with the Doctor
      and her mother; but she said, it seemed, that she was better than she had
      been since morning, and that she would rather be brought among us; so they
      brought her in, looking very white and weak, I thought, and sat her on a
      sofa.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Annie, my dear,' said her mother, doing something to her dress. 'See
      here! You have lost a bow. Will anybody be so good as find a ribbon; a
      cherry-coloured ribbon?'
    </p>
    <p>
      It was the one she had worn at her bosom. We all looked for it; I myself
      looked everywhere, I am certain&mdash;but nobody could find it.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Do you recollect where you had it last, Annie?' said her mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      I wondered how I could have thought she looked white, or anything but
      burning red, when she answered that she had had it safe, a little while
      ago, she thought, but it was not worth looking for.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nevertheless, it was looked for again, and still not found. She entreated
      that there might be no more searching; but it was still sought for, in a
      desultory way, until she was quite well, and the company took their
      departure.
    </p>
    <p>
      We walked very slowly home, Mr. Wickfield, Agnes, and I&mdash;Agnes and I
      admiring the moonlight, and Mr. Wickfield scarcely raising his eyes from
      the ground. When we, at last, reached our own door, Agnes discovered that
      she had left her little reticule behind. Delighted to be of any service to
      her, I ran back to fetch it.
    </p>
    <p>
      I went into the supper-room where it had been left, which was deserted and
      dark. But a door of communication between that and the Doctor's study,
      where there was a light, being open, I passed on there, to say what I
      wanted, and to get a candle.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Doctor was sitting in his easy-chair by the fireside, and his young
      wife was on a stool at his feet. The Doctor, with a complacent smile, was
      reading aloud some manuscript explanation or statement of a theory out of
      that interminable Dictionary, and she was looking up at him. But with such
      a face as I never saw. It was so beautiful in its form, it was so ashy
      pale, it was so fixed in its abstraction, it was so full of a wild,
      sleep-walking, dreamy horror of I don't know what. The eyes were wide
      open, and her brown hair fell in two rich clusters on her shoulders, and
      on her white dress, disordered by the want of the lost ribbon. Distinctly
      as I recollect her look, I cannot say of what it was expressive, I cannot
      even say of what it is expressive to me now, rising again before my older
      judgement. Penitence, humiliation, shame, pride, love, and trustfulness&mdash;I
      see them all; and in them all, I see that horror of I don't know what.
    </p>
    <p>
      My entrance, and my saying what I wanted, roused her. It disturbed the
      Doctor too, for when I went back to replace the candle I had taken from
      the table, he was patting her head, in his fatherly way, and saying he was
      a merciless drone to let her tempt him into reading on; and he would have
      her go to bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      But she asked him, in a rapid, urgent manner, to let her stay&mdash;to let
      her feel assured (I heard her murmur some broken words to this effect)
      that she was in his confidence that night. And, as she turned again
      towards him, after glancing at me as I left the room and went out at the
      door, I saw her cross her hands upon his knee, and look up at him with the
      same face, something quieted, as he resumed his reading.
    </p>
    <p>
      It made a great impression on me, and I remembered it a long time
      afterwards; as I shall have occasion to narrate when the time comes.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0017" id="link2HCH0017">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
