<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Preface to the 1850 Edition</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface-1850" epub:type="preface">
    <h2>Preface to the 1850 Edition</h2>
   z
    <p>
      I do not find it easy to get sufficiently far away from this Book, in the
      first sensations of having finished it, to refer to it with the composure
      which this formal heading would seem to require. My interest in it, is so
      recent and strong; and my mind is so divided between pleasure and regret&mdash;pleasure
      in the achievement of a long design, regret in the separation from many
      companions&mdash;that I am in danger of wearying the reader whom I love,
      with personal confidences, and private emotions.
    </p>
    <p>
      Besides which, all that I could say of the Story, to any purpose, I have
      endeavoured to say in it.
    </p>
    <p>
      It would concern the reader little, perhaps, to know, how sorrowfully the
      pen is laid down at the close of a two-years' imaginative task; or how an
      Author feels as if he were dismissing some portion of himself into the
      shadowy world, when a crowd of the creatures of his brain are going from
      him for ever. Yet, I have nothing else to tell; unless, indeed, I were to
      confess (which might be of less moment still) that no one can ever believe
      this Narrative, in the reading, more than I have believed it in the
      writing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Instead of looking back, therefore, I will look forward. I cannot close
      this Volume more agreeably to myself, than with a hopeful glance towards
      the time when I shall again put forth my two green leaves once a month,
      and with a faithful remembrance of the genial sun and showers that have
      fallen on these leaves of David Copperfield, and made me happy.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     London, October, 1850.
</pre>
</section></body></html>
