<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Preface to the Charles Dickens Edition</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="peface" epub:type="preface">
    <h2>Preface to the Charles Dickens Edition</h2>
  <p>
      I REMARKED in the original Preface to this Book, that I did not find it
      easy to get sufficiently far away from it, in the first sensations of
      having finished it, to refer to it with the composure which this formal
      heading would seem to require. My interest in it was so recent and strong,
      and my mind was so divided between pleasure and regret&mdash;pleasure in
      the achievement of a long design, regret in the separation from many
      companions&mdash;that I was in danger of wearying the reader with personal
      confidences and private emotions.
    </p>
    <p>
      Besides which, all that I could have said of the Story to any purpose, I
      had endeavoured to say in it.
    </p>
    <p>
      It would concern the reader little, perhaps, to know how sorrowfully the
      pen is laid down at the close of a two-years' imaginative task; or how an
      Author feels as if he were dismissing some portion of himself into the
      shadowy world, when a crowd of the creatures of his brain are going from
      him for ever. Yet, I had nothing else to tell; unless, indeed, I were to
      confess (which might be of less moment still), that no one can ever
      believe this Narrative, in the reading, more than I believed it in the
      writing.
    </p>
    <p>
      So true are these avowals at the present day, that I can now only take the
      reader into one confidence more. Of all my books, I like this the best. It
      will be easily believed that I am a fond parent to every child of my
      fancy, and that no one can ever love that family as dearly as I love them.
      But, like many fond parents, I have in my heart of hearts a favourite
      child. And his name is
    </p>
    <p>
      DAVID COPPERFIELD.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     1869
</pre>
</section></body></html>
